COMM 2035 Communication, Ethics and Law Lecture 3  Ethics / Law and Film MakingPart 2Professor KC CHAN Raymond R. Wong Endowed Professor in Media EthicsProfessor of Practice Semester 1 , 2025 / 26Ethics on Computer-generated imagery ( CG / CGI )Computer-generated imagery (CG or CGI) is the creation of stillimages or animations using imaging software for use in a varietyof media such as films, television, advertising, engineering, themedical field, and architecture.While this technology has been available since IvanSutherland’s foundational work at MIT in the 1960s(Sutherland, 1964), recent advances in computer softwareand hardware have enabled higher quality results withlower costs.These improvements have led to far more believablescenes in movies and television but like the double-edgedsword in Hebrews, this technology can lead to ethicalchallenges based on the thoughts and intentions of theheart.••The use of advanced computer systems today allows theproduction of realistic special effects (e.g. explosions), smoke,fur, and skin texture, as well as, de-aging current actors oreven recreating deceased actors.This second use of CGI, for de-aging/recreation, is where the ethical dilemmas arise.Video :What is CGI? All about CGI technology in simple wordshttps://applet3d.com/3d-rendering/what-is-cgi/The Ethical Dilemma Begins None of the aforementionedspecial effects pose any ethical dilemmas but in morerecent years, the use of technologically advancedcomputers and advances in software have led to a new areathat can lead to ethical questions.Some films from the last decade   have included scenes where an   actor has been “de-aged”   through technology.Call for safeguards to prevent unwanted “hauntings “ by AI chatbots of dead loved onesResearch of University of Cambridge 9 May 2024Cambridge researchers lay out the need for design safety protocols thatprevent the emerging “digital afterlife industry” causing social andpsychological harm. https://www.cam.ac.uk/research/news/call-for-safeguards-to-prevent-unwanted-hauntings-by-ai-chatbots-of-dead-loved-onesArtificial intelligence that allows users to hold text and voice conversationswith lost loved ones runs the risk of causing psychological harm and evendigitally 'haunting' those left behind without design safety standards,according to University of Cambridge researchers. From:Good AI is Ethical AI : The Media & EntertainmentHas to Check ItselfEmily M. Reigart  Senior Editor NAB Amplify22 July 2024https://www.wittenberg.edu/sites/default/files/media/alcf-2019/Wahl.pdfWhat's Wrong with Computer-GeneratedImages of Perfection in Advertising?Computer technology has allowed advertisers to create fantasticimages such as an automobile perched at the top of anunreachable mountain, pieces of clothing moving of their ownvolition throughout rooms, and dogs performing complicateddance moves.These fantastic images, however, are not limited toinanimate objects and nonhuman animals.Often, advertisers use computer technology to createimages of humans.Video : 8 AI Companies Generating Creative Advertising Content, by Kate Koidan, TOPBOTS , 8 June 2020.https://www.topbots.com/ai-companies-generating-creative-advertising-content/Deception ObjectionThe two most common objections to advertising are thedeception objection.According to the deception objection, an ad is unethical if itis deceptive.An ad is deceptive if it makes a false or misleading claim about amaterial feature of the product such as price, quantity, quality,or safety.Autonomy ObjectionThe autonomy objection comes in two basic forms.The first focuses on specific choices about products and the information consumers need to make those choices autonomously.To make autonomous choices to purchase particular products,consumers must make rational choices.Rational choices involve many things, but central among them is that the choices are based on analyses of products' abilities to satisfy particular needs or wants.Ethical significance of computer-generated images ofperfection.The computer-generated images are significantly different thanthose in ordinary ads.They place consumers in virtual realities in which they mustmake choices.Consider ordinary ads that contain no computer-generated images of any sort.In many cases, such as when advertisers use computer technology todepict comic images or to create dramatic effect, no ethical problemarises because viewers are well aware of the virtual realities to whichthey are subjected.Discussion :Do you agree ?When it comes to computer-generated images of perfection,however, an ethical problem arises because viewers are oftenunaware of the virtual realities to which they are subjected.When advertisers use computer technology to remove unwanted traits from models, viewers have no way of knowing that the removals have taken place.Likewise, as technology develops, advertisers will becomebetter able to generate images of entire models and viewerswill have no way of knowing that those images are not real.Advertisers' ethical obligation to avoid certain aesthetic results.Video : China is tempting customers with its flawless AI idolshttps://www.insider.com/chinas-flawless- ai-influencers-the-hot-new-queens-of- advertising-2021-8Advertisers are ethically obligated to avoid certain aestheticresults that are produced by the use of computer-generatedimages of perfection. If you successfully defend thisobjection, you will achieve two important goals.Ethical Considerations in Artificial Intelligence inMedia & Entertainmentby FPT Software   5 December 2022https://fptsoftware.com/resource-center/blogs/ethical-considerations-in-artificial-intelligence-in-media-entertainmentReference ReadingWhat's Wrong with Computer-Generated Images of Perfection inAdvertising?By Earl W. Spurgin,John Carroll University, July 2003.https://collected.jcu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?《樹⼤招⾵》偽鈔案 道具領班上訴得直 獲推翻罪名電影《樹⼤招⾵》的道具領班有「道具全」之稱的張偉全，為 拍戲之⽤⽽管有道具銀紙，卻被指保管偽造紙幣並被裁定罪成， 事件令業界嘩然。張不服定罪，早前提出上訴，⾼等法院今午（2018年10⽉15⽇）就案件頒下判詞，法官裁定張上訴得直，獲撤銷原有定罪及刑罰上訴⼈張偉全（47歲）被指管有22.3萬張道具銀紙，⽽被控管有偽鈔罪成，被判⼊獄4個⽉，緩刑2年。據悉該批偽鈔亦曾⽤作拍電影《迷城》。 張的律師早前在庭上指，裁判官沒有檢視全部涉案的道具銀紙，卻只檢視了樣本，程序上有不當，難以判定道具銀紙的像真度。強調拍戲只是為求逼真另⼀⽅⾯，律師亦指裁判官未有處理張的⾃辯。即使張覺得道具銀紙的質素不差劣，但不代表張認為涉案銀紙能冒充真鈔。⽽且，張管有道具銀紙的⽬的是為了拍攝電影時讓觀眾看起來覺得逼真，但與道具銀紙被⼈拿上⼿接觸得出的推論不能混為⼀談。官:未⾜以證明張知道具能冒充真鈔，⽤作道具也須⼩⼼處理法官⿈崇厚在判詞指，他同意上訴⽅說法，即使張沒有理由會相信道具銀紙像真度差，不等於張⼀定相信它們相似度達到法例所須的程度。⿈官認為，本案證據不⾜以⽀持張⼀定知道或相信道具銀紙與偽 鈔相似，並能在合理程度上冒充真鈔，故裁定張上訴得直。 ⿈官亦提及，管有像真度⾼的「偽鈔」，即使不打算⽤來欺騙他⼈，也是嚴重的事情，因難以確保不會落⼊有不法企圖的⼈⼿中，故必須慎重處理。 。即使管有者沒有不法之⼼，如只是作道具之⽤，也須⼗分⼩⼼，依法處理。 若說張不知道有違規，⿈官表⽰詫異，因他在⾏內富有經驗。但⿈官指，希望本案後，相關規定會為業界和市⺠所知，依法⾏事。業界指未能考慮電影的特殊需要張的案件引起業界嘩然，⾹港電影⼯作者總會永遠榮譽會⻑吳思遠 亦曾數度到庭了解情況，他並說，因業界拍戲求逼真，道具鈔仿真 度⾼便被控，實在⼗分不公平，認為控⽅未有考慮電影的特殊需要， 更直⾔若情況真的如此，不如以後全部改拍古裝。稱他⾃60年代⼊⾏，從來未聽聞使⽤道具銀紙拍攝要申請，⼜指警 ⽅過往⼀直⾒著⾹港電影中有⽤道具銀紙，從未作過檢控，反問若⽚中⽤警察委任證會否被控使⽤假⽂件。吳⼜指，控⽅⾄今才檢控告不公平；他在庭外更直⾔是次檢控荒誕，浪費納稅⼈⾦錢。⾦管局稱已優化複製流通貨幣的程序⾹港⾦融管理局發⾔⼈稱，《刑事罪⾏條例》第100條涉及管有偽鈔的罪⾏是由警⽅執法。就今⽇(2018年10⽉15⽇）⾼等法院的判決，據了解，警⽅會研究判詞，⾦管局沒有進⼀步評論。案件編號：⾄於就電影業界申請製作道具鈔票事宜，⾦管局及警⽅早前已採納業界的建議，優化根據《刑事罪⾏條例》第103條申請複製⾹港流通紙幣的程序，新指引已於7⽉11⽇上載⾦管局網⾴。HCMA300/2018From⾹港01https://www.hk01.com/article/156063?utm_source=01articlecopy&utm_medium=referral控⽅案情3. 2016年11⽉2⽇，警員從第⼀被告⼈的私家⾞內搜獲⼀箱印 有道具字樣的「道具銀紙」，這些「道具銀紙」來⾃上訴⼈的 公司。4. 翌⽇，警員到上訴⼈的公司進⾏搜查，在公司內搜獲⼀批印 有道具字樣的「道具銀紙」。在警誡下，上訴⼈說：「因為我 做道具嘅，呢啲錢係我公司⽤嚟拍電影嘅」。5. 控⽅的偽鈔專家就本案檢獲的所有「道具銀紙」進⾏實體及  顯微鏡檢驗，認為它們全是偽鈔。上訴6. 上訴⼈由郭棟明資深⼤律師和曾嘉麗⼤律師代表，提出的上訴   理由如下： (⼀) 原審裁判官沒有檢視相關控罪的每⼀張港幣「道具銀紙」構   成重⼤不當之處。 (⼆)  原審裁判官沒有考慮⁄充⾜考慮港幣「道具銀紙」與真鈔不同      之處⽽只是從其外貌表⾯上看來與真鈔⼗分相似便裁斷它們為      流通紙幣的偽製品。 (三)  原審裁判官沒有考慮⁄充⾜考慮上訴⼈之證⾔⽽只是依賴其裁   斷上訴⼈知道有「道具銀紙」及他沒理由相信「道具銀紙」的    像真度差劣便推斷他是知道或相信「道具銀紙」是流通紙幣的   偽製品。上訴7.本席裁定，上訴理由(⼀) 和(⼆) 都不成⽴，但理由(三) 成⽴， 據 此裁定上訴得直，撤銷了定罪。8. 就上訴⼈作出如上⽂第1段所述的申請，雙⽅同意，可以書⾯陳  詞代替開庭聆訊穿着制服作拍攝用途之申請指引警務處處⻑有權批准演員穿着警察(包括輔警)、交通督導員、政府⾶⾏服務隊及中國⼈⺠解放軍駐⾹港部隊(簡稱駐港部隊)的制服作拍攝⽤途。申請須以書⾯形式提出。申請⼈須填妥穿着仿造制服進⾏外景攝製的 特定申請表* ，⾄少在擬拍攝前3個⼯作天 將申請表連同故事⼤綱、劇本、演員穿上制服的造型照⽚(每⼈4張，分別顯⽰正⾯、背⾯及左右兩側)，以傳真、電郵⽅式或親⾃遞交給公共關係部。如有需要，申請⼈亦須提供有關業主或⼤廈管理公司的同意書。如欲使⽤仿造的政府⾶⾏服務隊及駐港部隊制服或⾮常類似該種制服的⾐服，亦須向公共關係部申請。接獲這類申請後，公共關係部會將申請轉交有關機構審定，因此處理時間會較⻑。如欲使⽤仿造⾹港海關或⼊境事務處等其他紀律部⾨的制服，須直接向⼊境事務處處⻑或海關關⻑申請。處理申請須考慮的事項在收到申請表後，公共關係部及擬拍攝的地點所屬分區會考慮以下各點：准許演員穿警察制服進⾏外景攝製1. 所需資料及證明⽂件(即故事⼤綱、劇本及演員穿上仿造制服的 造  型照⽚)是否全部在擬拍攝前不少於3個⼯作天交抵公共關係部；2. 有關地點是否適合進⾏該項拍攝⼯作；3. 若拍攝在公眾地⽅進⾏，擬拍攝的時間會否對其他道路使⽤   者造成不便，並可能對他們構成危害或滋擾。若拍攝在私⼈   處所進⾏，會否為附近的居⺠帶來同樣問題；以及 4. 有關拍攝會否損害公眾⼈⼠對⾹港警隊誠信之信⼼。END