

COMM 2035   Theories of Ethics

1st Semester 2024 / 25     September 2024




              Confucius´ &  Aristotle's  Golden Mean:

         In Aristotle’s Rule of the Golden Mean, he discussed that for
every polarity, there is a mean which when practiced are good benchmarks
for a life of moderation. For example, if on one side of the polarity of
food consumption there is gluttony and the other is food deprivation, the
golden mean is a balanced diet. If on one side of the polarity of sexuality
is consummation of sex and the other side is celibacy, we can deduce that
the golden mean is intimacy.
         Experience tells us that anything done in excessive doses creates
an imbalance – whether it’s consumption or abstinence. In the polarity of
consumption and abstinence, the golden mean is moderation. How it is done
or practiced is a balance of science and art. If science is the methodical
and logical approach and art is the creative and intuitive approach, the
golden mean is a balanced, happy and productive life. If we do things in
moderation, it is not mathematically computed as zero or the absence of
anything all the time but the mean of all the values present or needed to
create the desired whole.
         Using the principles of the scales, the weight of one side equal
to the other side not necessarily in the same volume creates balance. A
rock on one side can be balanced by one vale of hay on the other. Good food
and sex as an expression of love among other factors contribute to a
wholistic meaning to life not harming other beings. When sheer joy is lost
in these aspects, life loses its basic harmony. Where there is harmony,
there is love in agape -- where people do what they love and love what they
do that does not violate human life. Then, people are motivated to do in
scientific and creative expression of human faculties balancing the use of
natural resources.
         And there is sustainable progress balancing commerce and
environmental preservation; where the mean is human wellness. Where there
is rashness in the midst of adversity in one side and cowardice in the
other, the golden mean is courage. In materialism versus spirituality, the
golden mean is social responsibility.
         The more we see the golden mean in each polarity, the better we
find the true benchmarks of a life of wellness.
 http://www.odemagazine.com/blogs/roundtable/316/the_wisdom_of_aristotle_s_g
olden_mean
         All of the above material from Aristotle may be taken as
compatible with the Confucian Doctrine of the Mean. For example, the
Confucian thinker, Hun Tsu, wrote, "Knowledge, humanity, and courage--these
three are virtues which apply to all humanity and that by which they are
practiced is one." (Theodore DeBary, Sources of Chinese Civilization, p.
134) The wise practice of the virtues of wisdom, courage, and humanity
requires that all the virtues be practiced together. First, a person cannot
be wise without being courageous in facing dangers to one's search for
truth, and a person cannot be wise without loving consideration of ideal
humanity in both self and other. Second, a person cannot be courageous
without wise consideration of both the dangers one must face and of the
true ideal of humanity in both self and other as a value of inherent worth
which is more precious than mere physical life. Finally, a person cannot
exercise the virtue of true humanity without a wise understanding of the
value of wisdom and of autonomy (self-choice/self-guidance) and without a
grasp of the inherent value and beauty of courageous actions on behalf of
wisdom and true humanity. In summary, wisdom, courage, and humanity, and
indeed all other virtues by extension, must be practiced together as one.
         Because wisdom, courage, and humanity must all be practiced
together and indeed with all other virtues, therefore a wise balancing of
all aspects of one's personal and social virtues results in a Golden Mean.
See for example. Frost, p. 110:
         Superior persons do what is proper to the station in which they
find themselves; they do not desire to go beyond this. In a position of
wealth and honor, they do what is proper to a position of wealth and honor;
in a poor and low position, they do what is proper to a poor and low
position; situated among barbarous tribes, they do what is proper to
barbarous tribes; in a position of sorrow and difficulty, they do what is
proper to a position of sorrow and difficulty. Superior persons can find
themselves in no position in which they are not themselves. In a high
position they do not treat with contempt their inferiors; in a low
situation they do not court the favor of their superiors. They rectify
themselves and seek nothing from others so that they have no
dissatisfaction.
         Just as Aristotle holds that the virtues of temperance, courage,
wisdom, justice, and love are based upon the dignity of the human person in
oneself and others, so also Confucius holds that jen, true humanity with
all the virtues that enhance true humanity, has a basic principle which is
never violated and which always helps to create the moral order, yung, that
will bring enduring harmony and mutual fulfillment when practiced by all
humanity. For Confucius, the objective statement of this principle is shu,
reciprocity, and the personal attitude by which one truly relates to the
objective principle is cheng, sincerity.
http://falcon.jmu.edu/~omearawm/confucius.html

               Kant´s Categorical Imperative:

         The Categorical Imperative was formulated by Immanuel Kant as an
attempt to provide a criteria through which to judge moral law. It is a
deontological approach to morality, it relies not on the consequences of an
action but on whether an action is right or wrong for it’s own sake. The
Categorical Imperative is Kant bases his entire argument on reason, he
believed that statements about the moral law were a priori and could be
reached through logic alone, independent of experience . This leads Kant to
fully explore the rational steps which direct him to his conclusions.
         For Kant the only thing in the world which can be considered
entirely good is the good will . By this he means that although there are
other things which we might consider good, intelligence, wit, courage to
name a few, all these could also be bad and hurtful. Kant argues that the
good will is not reliant on the consequences of an action but in through
its willing alone. To illustrate the point, one could imagine a madman with
a gun intent on murdering a random member of the public. If, by chance, his
target turns out to be an even more evil individual who was intending to
slaughter thousands of innocent children, our first madman who ‘does good’
by shooting him, however there is no doubt that this does not show good
will. Kant makes the assumption that a human being is free to chose the
good will, without free will we are not free to make moral decisions and
any discussion about morality is futile. The good will is the highest task
for humankind.
         For Kant the most important aim for humankind is the development
of the good will. This is achieved through the application of The
Categorical Imperative to moral law and moral decision making. Kant’s
theory does not rely on the existence of god for it is based entirely on
logic and Rationality. For Kant God is served when mankind acts morally
toward itself using reason and logic. The theory behind the Categorical
Imperative is  well developed, based on an intention to develop the good
will so that the actions of humankind toward each other become selfless
therefore, in theory, creating a Utopian society.
http://www.religiousstudies.co.uk/alevel/kant2.htm














                  Mills Principle of Utility:

            Mill defends the possibility of a strong utilitarian conscience
(i.e. a strong feeling of obligation to the general happiness) by showing
how such a feeling can develop out of the natural desire we have to be in
unity with fellow creatures—a desire that enables us to care what happens
to them and to perceive our own interests as linked with theirs. Though
Chapter Two showed that we do not need to attend constantly to the general
happiness, it is nevertheless a sign of moral progress when the happiness
of others, including the happiness of those we don’t know, becomes
important to us.
http://www.iep.utm.edu/m/milljs.htm#SSH2d.i




                        Rawl´s Veil of Ignorance

         Rawls says that persons in the veil of ignorance would base their
design of society on the maximin rule. The idea is that since a person does
not know who they are in the real world, they must be prepared to end up
being anyone.
         There are a lot of different societies the persons in the original
position could design. So each person will want to pick the one society
that offers the least bad alternative, ,meaning they will pick the society
that has its least fortunate individuals in the least unfortunate
situation.
         Rawls suggests a super-simple way to understand the original
position: two persons have a piece of cake to share between them by cutting
it into two pieces. They each like the cake and want as big a piece as
possible. They agree that one of them will cut the cake once and the other
will get to choose one of the two pieces. This guarantees that the cake
will be shared fairly. This is the maximin rule applied to just two
persons.
         If all this sounds very artificial and contrived, it is! Rawls
admits that the whole theory is designed to fit a proper sense of justice.
He concludes that the persons in the original position will agree to a
society that obeys the Two Basic Principles of Justice: 1.Each person
should get an equal guarantee to as many different liberties--and as much
of those liberties--as can be guaranteed to everyone else at the same time.
2.Inequalities in society are okay only if they are arranged so that the
inequalities actually help out the least fortunate persons in society and
the inequalities are connected to positions or offices or jobs in society
that everyone has an equal opportunity to attain.
         The liberties Rawls is talking about are: political liberty (the
right to vote and to be eligible for public office), freedom of speech and
assembly, liberty of conscience and freedom of thought, freedom of the
person along with the right to hold (personal) property, freedom from
arbitrary arrest and seizure.
         However, Rawls is not talking about complete liberty to do, to
have or to keep absolutely anything.
         The inequalities Rawls is talking about are: inequalities in the
distribution of income and wealth and inequalities set up by institutions
that use differences in authority and responsibility or chains ofcommand.
         Rawls says these two principles of justice are ordered: society
cannot justify a decrease in liberty by an increase in social and economic
advantages.
 http://infotech.fanshawec.ca/faculty/jedicke/rawls.htm

                            Agape Principle:
         The tradition of agape, or unconditional love, is not exclusive to
any one religion. Actually, it is a major underlying principle found in
religions worldwide. The concept of altruistic love is one that challenges
the spiritual person to "love your enemies," or to "love without thought of
return." It is a love that flows out to others in the form of compassion,
kindness, tenderness, and charitable giving.
http://ebooks.ebookmall.com/title/agape-love-templeton-ebooks.htm
Sources:
http://www.odemagazine.com/blogs/roundtable/316/the_wisdom_of_aristotle_s_go
lden_mean,
http://falcon.jmu.edu/~omearawm/confucius.html
http://www.religiousstudies.co.uk/alevel/kant2.htm
http://www.iep.utm.edu/m/milljs.htm#SSH2d.i
http://infotech.fanshawec.ca/faculty/jedicke/rawls.htm
http://ebooks.ebookmall.com/title/agape-love-templeton-ebooks.htm




