COMM 2035 Communication, Ethics and Law

Supplementary Notes - 3

Semester 1 , 2024/25

Professor KC CHAN





Two major viewpoints of morality



A. Consequentialist (teleological) morality is based on or concerned with consequences.

B. Nonconsequentialist (deontological) morality is not based on or concerned with consequences.



Psychologicalegoism



A. This is not an ethical theory but a descriptive or scientific theory having to do with egoism.



B. It appears in two forms, neither of which can operate as a basis for ethicalegoism.



1. The strong form holds that people always act in their own self-interest.

2. The weak form holds that people often, but not always, act in their own self-interest.



C. Psychological egoism in its strong form does not refute morality, and in its weak form it does not provide a rational foundation for ethicalegoism.



Utilitarianism



A. Utilitarianism maintains that everyone should perform that act or follow that moral rule which will bring about the greatest good (or happiness) for everyone concerned.



B. Act utilitarianism states that everyone should perform that act which will bring about the greatest good over bad for everyone affected by the act.



1. The act utilitarian believes that one can- not establish rules in advance to cover all situations and people because they are all different.

2. There are difficulties with this theory.



(a) It is very hard to ascertain what would be good consequences for others.

(b) It is impractical to have to begin anew with each situation, to decide what would be moral in that situation.

(c) It is nearly impossible to educate the young or the uninitiated to act morally if they can be given no rules or guides to follow.



C. Rule utilitarianism states that everyone always should follow the rule or rules that will bring about the greatest number of good consequences for all concerned.



1. The rule utilitarian believes that there are enough similar human motives, actions, and situations to justify setting up rules that will apply to all human beings and situations.



2. There are difficulties with this theory.



(a) As with act utilitarianism, it is difficult to determine what would be good conse- quences for others.



(b) It is difficult to see how rule utilitarians can be sure, given the vast differences among human beings and situations, that a rule really can be established to cover such diversity-that they can create a rule that will truly and always bring about the greatest good for all concerned.



(c) It is difficult to avoid making so many exceptions to rules that the rules cannot really function effectively.



D. Another problem for both forms of utilitarian ism is the cost-benefit analysis, or end- justifies-the-means, approach to morality.



1. There is the danger here of trying to deter- mine the social worth of individuals.



2. "The greatest good for all concerned" can often be interpreted as "the greatest good for the majority," with possible immoral con- sequences to any individuals in the minority.





3. Does even a good end justify any means used to attain it, or should we also consider our means and motives?



Problems with consequentialist theories



A. Consequentialist theories demand that we dis- cover and determine all of the consequences of our actions or rules.



B. This is virtually impossible to accomplish.



C. Do consequences or ends constitute all of morality?



Nonconsequentialist (deontological) theories of morality



A. The basic assumption of these theories is that consequences do not, and in fact should not, enter into our judging of whether actions or people are moral or immoral.



B. What is moral and immoral is decided upon the basis of some standard or standards of morality other than consequences.



Act nonconsequentialist theories



A. The act nonconsequentialist's major assumption is that there are no general moral rules or theories, but only particular actions, situations, and people about which we cannot generalize.



B. Decisions are based upon "intuitionism"; that is, what is right and wrong in any particular situation is based upon what people feel (intuit) is right or wrong-this is, therefore, a highly individualistic theory.



C. There are several criticisms of act nonconsequentialism.

1. How can we know, with no other guides, that what we feel will be morally correct?

2. How will we know when we have acquired sufficient facts to make a moral decision?

3. With morality so highly individualized, how can we know we are doing the best thing for everyone else involved in a particular situation?



4. Can we really rely upon nothing more than our momentary feelings to help us make our moral decisions?

5. How will we be able to justify our actions except by saying, "Well, it felt like the right thing for me to do"?



Kant's Duty Ethics



A. Kant believed that it is possible by reasoning alone to set up valid absolute moral rules that have the same force as indisputable mathematical truths.



1. Such truths must be logically consistent, not self-contradictory.

2. They also must be universalizable.



B. According to the Categorical Imperative, an act is immoral if the rule that would authorize it cannot be made into a rule for all human beings to follow.



C. The Practical Imperative, another important principle in Kant's moral system, states that no human being should be thought of or used merely as a means for someone else's end, but rather that each human being is a unique end in himself or herself.



D. Once moral rules have been discovered to be absolutes, human beings must obey them out of a sense of duty rather than follow their inclinations.



General criticisms of nonconsequentialist theories



A. Can we, and indeed should we, avoid consequences when we are trying to set up a moral system?



B. Is it entirely possible to exclude consequences from an ethical system?



C. What is the real point of any moral system if not to do good for oneself, others, or both and if not to create a moral society in which people can create and grow peacefully with a minimum of unnecessary conflict?



D. How do we resolve conflicts among moral rules that are equally absolute? This problem is peculiar to rule nonconsequentialist theories.



E. Any system that operates on a basis of such rigid absolutes as does rule nonconsequentialism closes the door on further discussion of moral quandaries.





END