
COMM 2035  Reference Reading     1st Semester 2024 / 25

Relationship Between Ethics and Law

 

Ethics is a set of standards, or a code, or value system, worked out from
human reason and experience, by which free human actions are determined as
ultimately right or wrong, good or evil. If acting agrees with these
standards, it is ethical, otherwise unethical.Law is a code of conduct
which the authority in power prescribes for society.



It basically differs from ethics in its option to use force if and when
necessary and by the fact that it is backed by power. Laws are, by and
large, fair and moral. But it is not easy to accept that laws can be the
foundations of ethics, or even that laws can ensure ethical behaviour.



There are many situations in life, where just following the law does not
make one ethical. For example, if a wealthy man intends to splash thousands
of Ghana Cedis on the anniversary of his dog whiles his neighbour has no
money to buy food and is being ejected from his home, there is no law to
prohibit the wealthy man from doing so. If he decides not to, it is because
of the dictates of his conscience, not because of the dictates of the law.
His conscience, ethical value system and principles forbid him to rejoice
when someone else nearby is in sorrow.



The law has no role to play in such a situation. Moreover, not all laws
have moral choice. There are many laws which do not involve any ethicality
questions - for example, we are required to walk on the left hand side of
the road. This is done to ensure traffic control and the traffic
discipline, but a question of ethics is not involved here. 



Again, all moral and ethical actions do not involve the law. For example,
it is ethical to love and respect your parents, but there is no law for it,
except when they are deliberately mistreated by their children.



Law represents the minimum standards of behaviour expected from people.
Merely following the law, does not make one ethical. Another aspect of the
legal system is that it prohibits us of certain actions. It also spells out
the negative consequences of our not following the law - that is legal
punishment.



However, ethical behaviour encourages us to do certain things and explains
the benefits, i.e., the positive aspects of these ethical behaviour. For
example, the law tells us not to steal, not to kill, but ethics tells us to
do good, speak the truth, help others in distress.

Thus there is a positive aspect inherent in ethical behaviour, whereas the
law is more concerned about negative behaviour. 



Yet another aspect of the law is that ethics precedes the action, the law
follows it. Ethics tells us what we should strive to develop in ourselves
(high moral standards), on the other hand, law tends to be more concerned
with the consequences of the negative action - what punishment would
follow, who is guilty and how shall justice be done.



Moreover, the law is a universally accepted, published document, whereas
ethics do be not yet have a universally accepted, consistent and published
concept - it is abstract, culture specific and left to the individual for
interpretation and action.



Some Laws have nothing to do with morality because they do not involve
serious matters. These include parking laws, dress codes and other laws
covering similar matters.



Our moral standards are sometimes incorporated into the law, when enough of
us feel that a moral standard should be enforced by the pressures of a
legal system. In contrast, laws are sometimes criticised and eliminated
when it becomes clear that they blatantly violate our moral standards.



Morality, therefore, has shaped and influenced many of the laws we have.
Most ethicists agree that all citizens have a moral obligation to obey the
law so long as the law does not require clearly unjust behaviour. This
means that, in most cases, it is immoral to break the law.



Tragically, the obligation to obey the law can create terrible conflicts
when the law requires something that the individual person believes is
immoral. In such cases, a person will be faced with a conflict between the
obligation to obey the law and the obligation to obey his or her
conscience.

